and these be 550 chips that has finally
come out after about a year of delay is
non-stop this is explicitly different
from the be 550 a chipset we'll talk
about that in a moment but the primary
focus today is to distill the B 550
chipset versus the X 570 chipset and the
differences between those two and
everything dating back to the a320
chipset from the original Rison 1000
series launched and these chipset line
has gotten somewhat confusing and naming
especially since and this is a negative
byproduct of a good thing especially
since Andy has supported it's a m4
platform and some of its older chipsets
through time as horizon has iterated so
today we're going to demystify that and
break it down in a table that we've had
verified as accurate to just give a
numerical look at what the actual i/o
device differences are numbered by
number between all the chipsets before
that this video is brought to you by
gigabyte - or srt x28 ET i extreme the
RT x 28 ET i extreme is built with a
triple axial cooling solution and ready
for anyone interested in intermediate
GPU overclocking although it's also up
for gaming out of the box the gigabyte
28 ET i can reach the higher performance
range required to play games at frame
rates at and Beyond 144 FPS couples
particularly well with games like Call
of Duty warzone Rainbow six siege and
other competitive FP assets gigabytes
extreme is built to be a looker for
system builders going for extra visual
flair learn more at the link in the
description below there's more to it
than just the i/o device differences of
course there's also differences for
processor support and for a few trailer
can support that we'll be talking about
- but to cover the B 550 a aspect first
we previously reviewed a motherboard
that has a be 550 a chipset this was
probably about January or so somewhere
around there and it is not be 550 as
we're talking about today
so just to recap B 550 a is basically
explicitly for system integrators or a
size and OAM people who build computers
and sell them to the mass-market not for
DIY this has not existed in the DIY
market at least not in any official
capacity B 550 a is simply B 450 except
rebranded it only exists so that the S
is and the OEMs
can sell their computers with a 500
series in the name of the motherboard
when they
listed on their websites but we're
talking about B 550 today it comes out
June 16th a lot of the motherboards will
be out in the June to July timeframe we
should see almost all the major ones on
market by July of this year of 2020 and
the biggest aspect outside the chips
have to consider in your board purchases
is going to be the vrm quality for
anyone working with higher core account
CPUs or overclocking and then obviously
the quality of the BIOS we're not
covering those today those are massive
topics on their own but if you're
curious we do have a video on B 450 X
570 X 470 all the board's not including
be 550 where we talk about the best
motherboards for AMD rise in CPUs and
we'll link that in the description below
if you are curious about seeing that and
getting some help on picking a
motherboard obviously up until be 550
than wants to do another so future
support this is the number one thing to
talk about other than the numerical
differences in IO support and our table
that we'll cover later the future
support for B 550 is listed as
supporting Zen three so Zen 3 will be
operable on X 570 and B 550 but not x4
70 B 450 or anything older than those in
terms of products IDs these obviously
have gotten a bit confusing and we
expect this video will reach a wider
mainstream audience so that means up to
Rison 3000 will be supported on the 400
series and 300 series with some caveats
and that the up to Rison 4000 at least
will be supported on the 500 series this
additional future-looking support will
probably be the driving reason for
upcoming board purchasers to consider
500 series boards rather than 400
especially considering a lot of the 400
series boards are otherwise completely
capable they're perfectly fine there's
extremely good be 450 boards that won't
really age in a negative way and
extremely good x4 70 boards that are
completely viable if you don't want PCIe
done for the difference is going forward
where we might have recommended be 450
in the past because it's perfectly fine
if you don't want Gen 4 you'll now have
to contend with the compatibility of Zen
3 and we don't fully know that naming
but it'll probably be called rise in
4000 that's not the same as rising forth
mobile that's a different architecture
so 7/3 is probably gonna be rising four
thousand desktop one additional points
of information to consider here is the
AP use and where they come into this so
the 3200 G the 3400 G and the 3000 G CPU
is that AMD calls AP is have integrated
graphics processors on them or I GPS
these are not officially supported on X
570 and they will not be officially
supported on P 550 so you should not buy
a 500 series motherboard for your Zen
Plus which would be a three thousand
numerical demarcation APU so it's got to
have a gen IGP in it those will not work
on 500 series don't buy them together
desktop three thousand three CPS will
work fine and it's just it comes down to
the architecture design plus or is it
then too
so let's get into a block diagram this
is Andy's block diagram of the AMD be
550 chipset it's not particularly
helpful but it gives you a good wider
picture of it and then we'll look at the
breakdown in a second remember that the
CPUs capabilities are independent and
unchanged by the chipset outside of BIOS
lock downs so PCIe gen 4 will run on the
CPU directly to the primary PCIe by 16
slot and the primary m dot 2 device that
means B 550 motherboards unlike their
predecessors will officially support
PCIe gen for for up to 2 devices some
early BIOS revisions on B 450
motherboards also allowed this but that
was erased with later a GC updates a GC
is the AMD BIOS package that's provided
to all the motherboard manufacturers
before they do their own work on it it's
also where you would get micro code
updates but that's what locked out the
gen for support so the chipset down link
remains PCIe gen3 by 4 because the
chipset doesn't extend any PCIe Gen 4
lanes to other devices so the extra
downlink bandwidth found on X 570 is
unnecessary for B 550 time to talk about
the chipset differences we made a table
for this and we verified the information
is accurate we're going to hide parts of
the table as we go to make it easier as
we follow along and we'll just uncover
them as we talk about each part so we'll
start with X 570 and B 550 revealed for
those chips at differences that's likely
the biggest question that everyone has
right now both chipsets support up to
Xen
three so far and again we don't know if
they'll support beyond that but it does
seem unlikely X 570 is a Gen 4 chipset
link be 550 uses Gen 3
that's because X 570 again has PCIe Gen
4 lanes which you can see marked in this
chart coming off of the chipset that are
separate from the CPUs lanes for the GPU
or that I'm about to device and the
primary slots be 550 has 0 of these
these are referred to as general purpose
lanes they can be reconfigured into
almost anything Intel also has general
purpose lanes on its chipsets we could
pull up a z3 90 or z4 90 block diagram
and you can see what that looks like but
they use additional phrasing for
something called HS io lanes or
high-speed io lanes and they make a
distinction between the connected
devices whether it's an Aegis i/o device
or not depending on the bandwidth used X
570s Gen 4 lanes can be split into
subgroups and we'll need to briefly cut
to an AMD slide to show that here's the
mdx 570 Lane configuration in more
detail than Andy's original block
diagram we are interested in those large
blocks on the right side there are four
sets of five four lanes listed here so
that's the 16 number we saw in the
previous table and those can be broken
into any of the configurations below
them for example these could be broken
apart into a single by 8 PCIe Gen 4 slot
as illustrated by the orange bar on the
left and then the other 8 could be
comprised of PCIe John 4 device a and
four SATA ports or you could do eight
SATA ports or if you're making some
weird binding motherboard on X 570 you
could do eight PCIe by one slots if you
want you get the idea it's pick and
choose up to sixteen more or less with
only a few guidelines back to our table
we'll pick up on the gentry line item
here B 550 has 10 PCIe gen3 general
purpose lanes with only two
reconfigurable 2 SATA we should clarify
that the phrase reconfigurable here
means that this is something the
motherboard manufacturer can choose to
do not something that the user is able
to do neither X 517 or B 550 have Gen 2
general purpose lanes will highlight
that line but both have 4 SATA 3 6
gigabit per second ports natively
supported 0 SATA Express and they split
USB 10 gigabit per second into 8 on X
570 and 2 on B 550 USB five gigabit
- on B 550 with USB 480 megabits per
second as for on X 576 on B 550 the
total USB native device support is 12
devices on X 570 and 10 on B 550 we
listed it with speeds since the USB if'
totally screwed its naming convention
but if you prefer names you'd have USB
2.0 at 480 megabits per second USB 3.0
the original naming before it was
renamed at least twice would have been
four point eight gigabytes per second we
listed us five there and then USB 10
gigabits per second would be while we we
think it's USB 3.7 square root 144 gen
zero point five but maybe they change
the name again so modern AMD CPUs also
have four USB 10 get here it for second
lanes you'll always get at least that as
long as the motherboard has put the
ports on the board and they're connected
to the CPU that brings us to the next
reminder which is that limiting the
chipset to this assortment of i/o
devices doesn't mean that's the only
thing that can be on the motherboard
with that chipset on it so again the CPU
has some IO on it it's got an i/o die on
Rison processors they are two or three
triplets depending on the processor you
buy that are active one of those in i/o
die and that's got some usb on it you've
got PCIe Jun 4 on it
for the newer CPUs anyway and that Gen 4
is what's enabled on B 550
despite be 550 itself the chipset not
having any Gen 4 lanes on it in addition
to this motherboard manufacturers could
buy more components if they wanted to to
add controllers to the board so you used
to see a lot of manufacturers buying a
secondary SATA controller often as media
and they throw that on the board and
then you get some maybe four more SATA
ports out of it
sometimes you see a quanta purchased for
10 Gigabit Ethernet you might see exp
lakhs multiplexing chips where your
bifurcating the lanes so that's all
ancillary stuff it's not provided within
the chipset but the chipset is not
limited
well the chipsets not limiting the
motherboard to expansion of i/o devices
it's just that the motherboard makers
have to buy additional controllers for
it and that's become a different thing
that's no longer and these
responsibilities at that point and
you're paying for it to as buyer
obviously separately to
the motherboard maker doesn't have to
use all the i/o devices that are
afforded to it by the chipset if they're
making maybe mini ITX or DTX board and
they just don't have the physical space
thank you got some stuff out
all right back to our table here well
add x4 70 and B 450 now and just uncover
those before 50 has been our go-to
recommendation lately for anyone who
isn't making use of PCIe gen 4 and who
doesn't need the higher-end VRMs
associated with x5 70 P 450 still got
plenty of high-end VRMs on it you can
even get into some overclocking without
going too extreme and you'll be fine
before 15 X 470 are still perfectly
capable and makes sense for people who
won't use Gen 4 devices but that said
again moving forward the expanded
support of X 570 and B 552 includes m3
will likely change our recommendation
towards B 550 rather than be 450 P 450
supports up to Xen - it uses a gen 3
link it host 0 PCIe 4 and PCIe 3 general
purpose lanes of its own and instead it
runs 6 PCIe generation 2 general purpose
lanes compared to 8 on the X 470 chipset
SATA 3 availability is for ports
natively 4 X 4 72 for be 450 with the
option to split other lanes off into
SATA those would come from your Gen 2
general purpose lanes or from your SATA
Express Lanes of which both last gen
chipsets have to each SATA express lane
can become 2 SATA ports or you can take
both and turn them into a single 4 and
vme gen 3 m dot 2 device support on
these is equivalent for USB 10 gigabits
per second it's 6 + 2 for USB 4.8 gets
per second and it's 6 + 6 where you have
to be 2.0 or 480 megabits per second the
primary difference between B 450 and B
550 highlighting those two columns is
the increased PCIe general purpose lanes
that also benefit from becoming PCIe
gen3 rather than PCIe gen 2 let's
uncover the first gen rise and launch
chipsets now on this chart that should
reveal X 370 be 350 and a 320 X 300 is
covered in our launch coverage if you're
curious about that implementation all
three of these stopped supporting Rison
past as n+ CPUs X 370 be 450 and a 320
support includes the confusingly named
horizon 3000 CPUs that are AP is so
anything with an AI GP in it that
include again 3200 GS
example PCIe gen3 general-purpose Lane
assignment is 8 on x3 76 on b3 54 on
a320 SATA 3 runs 4 2 & 2 respectively
say that Express is identical on all 3
this is commonly split into m2 or SATA
devices the USB 10 gigabit per second
port is 2 2 + 1 from high-end to low-end
4.8 gigabits per second is 6 2 + 2 + 480
megabits per second is 6 6 6 woe to you
Oh earth and sea let him who hath
understanding reckoned the number of the
beast currently I'm resisting the urge
to rewrite number of the beast into a
chip sets on so we're just going to move
on that recaps the chipset differences
in a pre clean fashion there are a few
other items to add and these trying to
position be 550 as a cheaper obviously X
570 so it's not against the
differentiation here is this isn't a
full step down in classification they
don't want really be 550 to be viewed as
a lesser class the next 570 unlike
before 54 his X 470 where there was a
much clearer kind of split in the minds
of the buyer of which one's better than
the other so be 550 is supposed to start
helping bring the pricing down while
still affording the core feature set of
X 570 namely that you get Gen 4 PCIe
official support is the key word there
for the CPU device but not on the
chipset that's that's the really the
biggest part of the wrap up here before
50 boards didn't technically support
dual GPU you'd probably never know
because no one actually uses it
unfortunately not a knock on people who
do we miss it but not really that common
anymore be 550 will support dual GPUs
for whatever that's worth and based on
am these slide deck 2 media be 550
chipset again will not support the 3000
ap use in an official capacity so don't
buy a be 550 board planning to use it
with a 3000 G 32 energy or a 3400 G APU
and we don't know what'll happen with
the next generation ap is we're not sure
if those will be supported or not but
we'll see Zen 3 again not to be confused
with Rison 3000 but we've gone over that
enough at this point so that should wrap
us up that's the differences if you want
the article version of just the plain
text table it'll be linked in the
description
for easy reference for you in the future
and obviously prefer people watch the
videos because well frankly that's what
actually makes the money the website
doesn't really make anything but if you
want to support us and support the fact
that we still maintain the website
because well I want to then you can go
to store that guarantees access net pick
up something like a mod mat a shirt a
mousepad and we've got toolkits coming
back in pretty the next couple months or
you go to patreon.com/scishow Emerson
axis in sports there for behind the
scenes videos thanks for watching we'll
see you all next time
[Music]